Republic of Congo.
In the middle of Africa.
A word from the people of Congo.
Ilunga!
And, what does “ilunga” mean?
It seems it characterises or represents a
person.
What kind of person?
Ready to forgive the first time he receives
or she receives any abuse.
Second time?
They will tolerate it.
And, the third time?
Never!
A person like this, a characteristic, a personality,
all conveyed in a single word.
It seems, on a survey conducted on thousands
of linguists, they rated this word, according
to the BBC News, they rated this word as the
most difficult word to translate.
Of course, if there is such an expansive backstory
for a single word, of course!
Acknowledgement is probably the most important
thing in any conversation and any issue resolution.
That is what we are covering today!
Namaste!
I am present, sir!
Four hundred and forty seven.
Watch this movie scene.
This is from a movie that represents Churchill.
His life history.
Particularly, his last few years.
The Darkest Hour.
“Will you stop interrupting me while I am
interrupting you?!”
— That was Churchill.
Churchill could say that.
But, not everybody else, every THING else!
This book talks about that problem, quite
extensively.
The Computer Science of Human Decisions.
Algorithms to Live By.
Algorithms that will be useful for our day
to day lives.
These are originally conceived to run software
optimally on computers, but you can use them
in daily life.
One such algorithm is about network traffic
and congestion.
Long ago, when the Internet was just being
born, even before it was CALLED the Internet,
it was called AlohaNET.
Some scientists in Hawaii wanted to have reliable
communication between the 137 islands of Hawaii.
They used radio at that time.
And, as long as it was just one transmitter
and one listener, all was well.
But, when both of them started transmitting
at the same time, all was HELL!
Because, I hardly ever listen when I am myself
speaking!
If you want me to listen to you while you
speak, I must NOT BE talking in the first
place!
What if there are more than two people speaking?
All HELL breaks loose.
So, how do we handle this?
I don’t know if you are going to start talking.
I am talking now..
I am about to start talking, but I have to
check if you are in listening mode.
How do I do that?
Do you remember the comedy scenes in movies,
where two people on a staircase, both of them
will move to the left side of the stairs,
and then both of them will move to the right…
Or, on a video call, a person starts talking,
but then, one person says “You go first”
while the other quips at the same time, “You
go first, sorry for the interruption, you
go first!”
How do you resolve this congestion?
For the past 45, 50 years, the internet is
being driven by this single beautiful algorithm
designed so long ago, in AlohaNet.
They called it, Exponential Backoff.
I try something.
You try the same thing at the same time.
We both realise that there is collision.
Instantly, I backoff.
And then wait.
How do I wait?
I toss a coin and wait.
How long do I wait?
First time, I wait one second, or one millisecond,
and the next time I have to, I wait two!
I wait four then!
Exponentially I increase my backoff time,
while tossing a coin.
And, that is enough for a credit card purchase
to happen in Amazon today, for a video call
to go through perfectly today, for a YouTube
video, including Quotidians, to be streamed
beautifully to your mobile device today, all
congestion taken care of, by this simple,
beautiful algorithm called Exponential Backoff.
A congestion, the same thing is tried by two
different people at the same time.
More than two people try..
How to backoff?!
They called it The Algorithm of Forgiveness.
To forgive…
To give yet another chance…
A way to do that.
You must have seen this..
In fact, it might have happened in your own
life too.
You call for a get-together party.
And, there are these guys, these girls.
They will come for NO SUCH THING.
And, what happens typically?
You guys get together, and you stop sending
that invitation to that person.
Instead, the book recommends, do not ever
stop!
When your browser tries to access a web page,
it never stops trying, did you notice?
It tries..
And then tries five seconds later, and then
tries twenty-five seconds later, exponential
backoff.
You try your ATM number, and assuming it fails
four times, the next attempt is one hour later,
if you fail again, the next attempt is only
possible two hours later, and if you fail
again, the next attempt is allowed only four
hours later.
Exponential Backoff.
Never say “Sorry, you will never be allowed
inside again!”
But, exponential backoff.
Punishment increases.
But, it is never lethal.
That “Finite Patience and Infinite Mercy”
combination.
That is what is needed.
If there was a member in your family, addicted
to drugs or drinks, and you try your best
to reform them, … and they get better slowly.
And then, suddenly, one fine day, they drop
off..
What?
You get angry?
Send them out of the house?
NO!
Give them an exponential backoff, once more.
How do you do that?
Have you been abstaining from all this for
ONE DAY?
Very good.
Ouch..
You abstained on the second day too, but slipped
and fell on the third day?
I am going to backoff.
I am not going to accept one day any more.
I am going to want one week!
Abstain for one full week..
You didn’t do that well either?
Okay, next time, you need to come back after
a month’s cool off period.
So, the punishment increases.
The opposite could also be done.
One month..
Unable to do it?
Well, do at least one week.
Isn’t this the classic story from the Mahabharatha?
Give us our country back.
Give at least five districts.
Five villages at least.
Space equivalent to the head of a pin…!
Do you remember?
Exponential backoff.
You give a person some money.
And they spend it well, they come back, give
you a proper account.
You give that person some more money.
Trust grows.
And, you give that person some more money.
And, trust grows even more.
Additive Increase.
Instead of going up rapidly in “multiplied
factors”, increase it slowly, gradually,
in a measured manner.
But, one fine day, they come to you and say
they have lost it, they are not able to account
properly for it, they seem to have cheated
you, what happens instantaneously?
You cut their allowance by half!
That is the equivalent of Multiplicative Decrease.
Additive — we went up in tens of rupees..
One thousand rupees, One thousand and ten
rupees, One thousand twenty rupees..
But, when there is a hint of cheating, break
of / breach of trust, 1000 becomes 500.
500 becomes 250.
Additive Increase.
Multiplicative Decrease.
These are the two keywords!
Exponential Backoff.
And, AIMD.
Additive Increase, Multiplicative Decrease.
These two are the algorithms that run the
internet today.
TCP — you must have heard of this protocol.
These are the two fundamental pillars of TCP.
Go look it up.
This book — The 12 Rules for Life — he
even calls it an antidote for chaos.
Jordan Peterson, in this book, refers to a
little book, inside this book.
That is the book we are going to ruffle through
fast.
It is possible, because, it is a book for
four-year-olds.
It is a little picture-book, called “There’s
no such thing as a Dragon”.
Acknowledgement is important.
Are you going to talk too?
I have understood that, and I am going to
change my behaviour.
Are you going to cheat?
Well, I have understood that, and I am going
to change my behaviour.
Wasn’t that what we saw all this while?
See what happens in this story.
One fine morning, the boy gets up.
He sees a cat-like creature on the bed.
Looks like a Dragon.
Goes to his Mom after patting this Dragon,
and says, “Mom, there is a Dragon on my
bed!” and Mom says, “There is no such
thing as a Dragon!
Keep quiet!”
This boy goes along with his work, and the
Dragon tries to help him.
Tries to involve itself in the boy’s day-to-day
life.
But, the boy ignores the Dragon.
Why?
Mom has said there is no such thing as a Dragon
and what is the point giving attention to
something which is “no such thing!”
So, he ignores it.
And the Dragon grows!
It becomes as large as a dog, that morning.
Mom gives food, dosas, pancakes, and the Dragon
starts eating everything.
This boy gets just one pancake from that pile
of pancakes.
Boy ignores.
Mom ignores.
The Dragon grows.
It becomes as large as the room now.
Mom continues to turn a blind eye.
Continues to do the household work.
Cleans the floor.
Moves from room to room through the windows,
as the doors are all blocked up by the Dragon.
But she still somehow manages it.
Ignoring the growing Dragon.
The Dragon becomes as large as the house.
Still, ignored.
A bread-van passes by.
Perhaps the Dragon loves bread.
It gets up, gives chase, and like the shell
on the back of a snail, the house starts moving.
The house is gone!
Dad comes back from work, looks for the house…
The next door neighbour says, “The house
is gone..
A Dragon…”
The Dad panics.
And, far away, there is this boy, his Mom,
all stuck up in the house, on the back of
a Dragon.
He goes near, asks, “What happened, how
did this all happen?!”
He enters the house too.
And, the boy says, “Dad, There IS such a
thing as a Dragon, Dad.
Look at this, touch it!”
Magic happens at that moment.
The Dragon … multiplicative decrease — the
Dragon becomes as small as a dog..
as small as a kitten.
Friendly, playful.
It had always been friendly and playful.
Mom says, “I wouldn’t mind a Dragon that
is as small as a kitten” — and thus ends
the story.
The boy says, “Mom, I think it just wanted
to be noticed..!”
Do you get the connection?
Four-year-olds perhaps loved this story.
But, even for forty-year-olds, there is a
nice message hidden there.
Because, some problems in our lives, they
want to be acknowledged.
They want to be noticed, and if you don’t
address them when they are small, they will
grow so large that you cannot address them
any more.
So, learn Exponential Backoff, and Additive
Increase, Multiplicative Decrease.
Use them appropriately in your lives.
As a closing thought, I had to end up thinking
quite contrarily.
For, I remember, from my childhood, a fairy-tale
story that I read called, “The Boy Who Knew
No Fear”.
The other name for the book was, “The Boy
Who Left Home To Find Out About The Shivers”.
Nobody showed me what fear was in my hometown,
and so, I am trying to travel the countryside,
perhaps spend time in this so-called Haunted
Castle for three nights, and learn what Fear
really is..
Interesting story..
The essence of it is, you need Creative Imagination,
you need a little Intelligence, to be even
afraid of anything..!
But the essence there is, if you don’t acknowledge
something..
“I am Fear” claims a foreboding being,
with horns on its head and an arrow-tail,
and a pitchfork in hand, red smoke puffing
from his nostrils, and stands in front of
you..
If you say, “Hi there, how do you do!”,
if you don’t acknowledge that person as
The Devil himself, they lose power..
This is the counter-thought?
If we don’t acknowledge, will they grow?
Keep growing?
Or, if we don’t acknowledge, like in the
case of this boy, ineffectively, will it become
a dummy piece?
What is your opinion?
Share in the comments..
Let us meet again, soon.
Thank you!